urara/canva_learnings/+page.md, before:

---
title: My Canva Experience
created: 2025-05-25
tags: [Work Experience]
---

This article serves as a reflection on my internship experience at Canva - my learnings, favourite moments and the wild three-month journey. So without further ado, let's dive into it.

![canva_exp](./IMG_0556.jpg)  

---

## The journey

### How did I end up at Canva?

A bit of background. Canva had always been one of my dream companies for a few reasons:
* First, without even realising it until applying, I had been using Canva to create stunning infographic designs since year 10. I always knew of the product and loved using it, but it never registered that the product was named Canva, and that it was a major technology employer based in Australia.
* Second, a couple of Canva employees showed up at an uni club trivia night I attended during my first year. One question was: "where was Canva founded?" I blindly guessed Perth, and somehow got it right. Ever since then, I had been enamoured by Canva. Perhaps it was the inspiration that came with seeing an amazing product originating from own hometown.

So without hesitation, I took my shot and applied during my penultimate year. It was a longshot. I knew just how competitive it would be. Infact, I later found out that just 89 interns were taken from a pool of ~ 7000 applicants. But after an online assessment and a technical plus behavioural interview, I had made it in.

### Week 1 - Onboarding

Onboarding week swiftly came and went. We were taken through ample modules and setup the software necessary for our projects (e.g. Snowflake, GitHub, Accessing Data Warehouse). I also met my support team - including my host, co-host and buddy - who were all super smart & lovely people, and discussed my intern project with my host!

All the interns spent the first week from the comfort of their home (or closest office), which meant that I explored the amazing Melbourne office. A small, cosy and humble abode in the heart of Collingwood, the Melbourne office had delicious breakfast and lunched served up by the chefs, a friendly vibe team who greeted you every morning, great background music, free merch at the swag station and sick artwork fit for a design company.

### Week 2 - Campus week

Campus week was when the fun really began. All the interns were flown to Sydney and given accomodation for a week, which meant some of us (myself included) got to meet our team in person, there were plenty of intern activities planned and we capped off the week with the annual Canva end-of-year party!  

Let me tell you, this party was amazing. There was plenty of music (including a dance floor) to keep the vibes high, the street was decked out for us with food trucks, we attended stand-up comedy, learned how to shoot arrows and got to connect with one another while drunk. Actually, we could've gotten drunk anytime with beer taps and alcohol readily available on the Sydney office rooftop.  

I'm going to be completely transparent. I didn't get much work done this week. There were just too many intern events - both during and outside of work hours - that I didn't find the time to fully concentrate on my intern project. Fortunately, my team had told me to enjoy myself this week and not worry too much about work.

### Weeks 3 to 8 - Sydney continues

### Weeks 9 to 11 - Back to Melbourne

### Week 12 - Wrapup



---

## Learnings

1. Meaningful project names matter.

---

## Concluding Remarks

Commit message:

Add sydney experience to canva article.

urara/canva_learnings/+page.md, after:

---
title: My Canva Experience
created: 2025-05-25
tags: [Work Experience]
---

This article serves as a reflection on my internship experience at Canva - my learnings, favourite moments and the wild three-month journey. So without further ado, let's dive into it.

![canva_exp](./IMG_0556.jpg)  

---

## The journey

### How did I end up at Canva?

A bit of background. Canva had always been one of my dream companies for a few reasons:
* It shocked me that I had been using Canva since year 10 to create stunning infographic designs. I always knew of the product and loved using it, but it never registered that the product was named Canva, and that it was a major technology employer based in Australia until I applied.
* A couple of Canva employees showed up at an uni club trivia night I attended during my first year. One question was: "where was Canva founded?" I blindly guessed Perth, and somehow got it right. Ever since then, I had been enamoured by Canva. Perhaps it was the inspiration that came with seeing an amazing product originate from own hometown.

So without hesitation, I applied. It was a longshot. I knew just how competitive it would be. Infact, I later found out that just 89 interns were taken from a pool of ~ 7000 applicants. But after an online assessment and a technical plus behavioural interview, I had made it in.

### Week 1 - Onboarding

Onboarding week swiftly came and went. We were taken through ample modules and setup the software necessary for our projects (e.g. Snowflake, GitHub, Accessing Data Warehouse). I also met my support team - including my host, co-host and buddy - who were all super smart & lovely people, and discussed my intern project with my host!

All the interns spent the first week from the comfort of their home (or closest office), which meant that I explored the amazing Melbourne office. A small, cosy and humble abode in the heart of Collingwood, the Melbourne office had delicious breakfast and lunched served up by the chefs, a friendly vibe team who greeted you every morning, great background music, free merch at the swag station and sick artwork fit for a design company.

### Week 2 - Campus week

Campus week was when the fun really began - especially since I was sick during week 1. All the interns were flown to Sydney and given accomodation for a week, which meant some of us (myself included) got to meet our team in person, there were plenty of intern activities planned and we capped off the week with the annual Canva end-of-year party!  

Let me tell you, the party was amazing. There was plenty of music (including a dance floor) to keep the vibes high, the street was decked out for us with food trucks, we attended stand-up comedy, learned how to shoot arrows and got to connect with one another while drunk. Actually, we could've gotten drunk anytime with beer taps and alcohol readily available on the Sydney office rooftop.  

I'm going to be completely transparent. I didn't get much work done this week. There were just too many intern events - both during and outside of work hours - that I didn't find the time to fully concentrate on my intern project. Fortunately, my team had told me to enjoy myself this week and not worry too much about work.

### Weeks 3 to 8 - Sydney

I decided to stay in Sydney for a few extra weeks - even after the all-expenses-paid Campus Week had wrapped up. My reasoning? I felt there was so much more Syndey could offer professionally and socially. I was fortunate in both of these aspects.  

Professionally, most of the product Data Scientists were located in Sydney including my host, co-host and buddy. This meant that I could better connect with my team and learn a heck of alot more (scroll down to find my key learnings). Infact, those two months felt jam-packed with personal milestones that I could celebrate with the team - including an engagement, baby announcement and permanent residency approval! Even though I wish I could've seen my team a bit more as many came in just once a week, I totally get why they couldn't come in more often and still had an amazing time with them. Plus, I had my buddy next to me four days a week!

Socially, Sydney had more people. Especially interns. While I do wish I had taken the opportunity to mingle with more interns, I truly feel blessed to have gotten close some amazing ones - especially those that also relocated from other states & stayed at Iglu accomodation. We would regularly explore the many wonders of Sydney (Bondi beach, Harbour bridge, Opera House, Manly etc), play games (Exploding Kitten, Codenames, Switch) and work together. I never felt there was a second to spare as some activity had always been planned for the weekend.  

Canva clubs were also a major highlight. You were allowed to attend up to four club-sponsored events each month, which meant the entire experience would be on the house! I was able to try out new activities like pilates (with my team) and pickleball, and endulge in treats like yo-chi, all for the price of ... NOTHING! Who doesn't love free stuff, all the while feeling part of a community :o

### Weeks 9 to 11 - Melbourne

### Week 12 - Wrapup

Canva is the quintessential design startup. Cool, modern and full of vibes!



---

## Learnings

1. Meaningful project names matter.
2. Quantifying impact is difficult as a Data Scientist. How does one resolve this? Be proactive and chat with Stakeholders about the impact - focus on helping me to launch meaningful features.
3. Always ask "so what"?
4. Setup coffee catchups. Seeing the number of connections other interns (especially Viv) managed was inspiring. I intend on taking this with me further in my career. Set-up coffee catchups with EVERYONE in my team. Be curious about their work.
5. Come prepared for one-on-one's with my manager. This is one area I did well. Come prepared with an Agenda doc and dot-points of topics to talk about. Example: project, career etc... 

---

## Concluding Remarks
